CCA analysis for the article:

"Disentangling post-stroke cognitive deficits and their neuroanatomical correlates using canonical correlation analysis for multi-outcome lesion-symptom mapping"

**Abstract:**

Studies in patients with brain lesions play a fundamental role in unraveling the brain’s functional architecture. Lesion-symptom mapping (LSM) techniques can relate lesion location to cognitive scores, but to avoid falsely attributing a function to a particular brain structure, interdependencies between lesion locations and interdependencies between cognitive scores must both be taken into account. Current LSM techniques only permit assessing one outcome at a time and can therefore not sufficiently deal with this. To overcome this challenge, we implemented canonical correlation analysis (CCA) as novel multi-outcome LSM approach that simultaneously takes interdependency between lesion locations and cognitive scores into account. We performed a proof-of-concept study on 1075 patients with acute ischemic stroke to explore whether addition of CCA to a conventional single-outcome LSM analysis pipeline could identify infarct locations associated with deficits in three well-defined verbal memory functions (encoding, consolidation, retrieval) based on four verbal memory subscores (immediate recall, delayed recall, recognition, learning ability). We evaluated whether CCA could extract cognitive score patterns that matched prior theoretical knowledge of these verbal memory functions, and whether these patterns could be linked to more specific infarct locations than through conventional LSM alone. We found that two of the canonical modes, consisting of linked cognitive and location-based information, indeed showed distinct patterns that matched encoding and consolidation functions also based on prior theoretical knowledge. In addition, CCA revealed that each canonical mode was linked to a distinct infarct pattern, while conventional LSM showed that individual verbal memory subscores were associated with largely overlapping locations. Our findings demonstrate that CCA can complement conventional LSM techniques to help disentangle cognitive functions and their neuroanatomical correlates.
